[Rowling and Yates] have created a delightful adventure movie that doubles as a franchise launching pad, and they did it by adapting a fictional textbook.
Even if you, like me, are a bit Pottered out and wish Rowling would devote herself instead to her marvelous Cormoran Strike detective-novel series (magic comes in many forms) - it's still a pleasure to revisit the author's world.
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them is a fun treat for Harry Potter fans, especially when the CGI creatures grace the screen.
From the opening music to the sweet final beat, it's a joy to be back in Rowling's world. Open the suitcase, we're coming in.
Harry and Hermione and Ron may have gone on to other things. But some of their most powerful magic is back. And I don't think we could have waited another minute.
I have heard the cash cow moo...the sort of movie many will feel obliged to like more than they actually want to clamor right back onto the ride.
It looks great and has a firm moral backbone, but thin characters, pacing issues, and a main narrative that is less interesting than the worldbuilding bring this well-intentioned blockbuster down.
Newt Scamander is indeed the hero who we need right now, and Rowling is the storyteller we need now more than ever.
Not even J.K. Rowling can say abracadabra and make a worthwhile movie franchise appear. The lightning that struck Harry Potter once merely grazes Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, turning the sorcerer's mentor into a fantasy apprentice.
Redmayne is superb in the lead, and there's real emotion, comedy and romance in his blossoming friendships.
Rowling's script is thrillingly immersive, plunging us into a world of wizarding that's instantly familiar to die-hard Potter fans yet dizzyingly inventive at the same time.
Style overtakes substance in J.K. Rowling's new era of Wizarding Worlds, when an overload of special effects and confused storytelling hinders the film from soaring like the winged beasts of the title... of course there are some good things too.
Yates and Rowling skillfully weave their bleak - and very blunt-edged - message into the fabric of the story. It might be wildly out of place in a fantasy aimed at tweens, but it's a welcome change from the usual vapid blockbuster.
With this heavy lifting done, there's every reason to hope for an even more magical adventure next time.
Who needs Harry Potter? With 'Fantastic Beasts', it's undeniable that the clear star is screenwriter and 'Harry Potter' author J.K. Rowling.
This first instalment showcases just enough of them to make you sign up for the full expedition.
There's just enough romance, whimsy, creativity and eye-catching visuals to enchant in Fantastic Beasts And Where To Find Them, but its flaws ultimately come close to ruining it all.
The "Potter" movies were so well conceived that they contain endless possibilities for more entries, and "Fantastic Beasts" takes the bait right on cue, not repeating a formula so much as enriching it with a spellbinding polish.
Rowling's latest trick is to cross Doctor Who with Doctor Dolittle. Newt and his menagerie provide just enough surprises for an action-packed couple of hours. But the magic man isn't quite as spellbinding as the wizard boy.
Rowling, who also wrote the script, nimbly lays out her world, but that world isn't nearly as rich as the world of Hogwarts.
Rowling and Yates succeed at transporting you to a magical world you don't want to leave.
Rowling and Yates have given us a terrifically good-natured, unpretentious and irresistibly buoyant film.
Likely to draw in just about everyone who followed the Potter series and to please most of them, the picture also has things to offer for fantasy-friendly moviegoers who only casually observed that phenomenon.
J.K. Rowling's "Harry Potter" spinoff is sheer magic, a grand fantasy-adventure that already feels like an old family favorite.
I'm not sure which is more adorable, Eddie Redmayne as Newt Scamander, or the creatures he smuggles into the US in his battered leather briefcase.
Has all the makings of a huge family blockbuster, but all the bloated traps of those, too. It hasn't quite got the balance right, but, like the title hints, surely knows where to find the magic formula over the ensuing movies.
Fantastic is right.
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them is a fine time, but it won't exactly sweep you up into New York City's wizarding world.
Entertainment Weekly
Empire Magazine
Diehard fans will likely adore it and its familiar Rowling magic, which gently rolls through the 1920s Jazz Age... and toward the darkest of tunnels up ahead.
As a feat of world-building and character-shaping, it sets an appealing stage.
A worthy, but much different, successor to Harry Potter.
"Fantastic Beasts" has clearly been designed for the most devoted of Rowling's fans, and though it may prove confusing to newcomers, the faithful will appreciate the fact the film never talks down to its audience.