...everything in Keeping Up With the Joneses is pretty, but that's just about all it is.
"Keeping Up with the Joneses" is a fun, silly comedy with few pretensions and an extremely likeable cast.
All four leads never really click, but man, do they clunk whenever the script goes from apologetically average to aggressively so.
As a spoof or spy movie, you have to say this about Keeping up with the Joneses -- it sure can't keep up with those Smiths.
Don't go expecting the premise to be in the same taut vein of The Bourne Identity. This is solely for escapism.
Draws the characters very broadly, doesn't contain nearly enough good jokes and drags out a thin and predictable espionage plot.
Relentlessly bland and devoid of laughs...
Short of laughs with little to recommend it beyond its likeable cast, this contrived and predictable action comedy begs for a sharper, wittier script and a lot more chutzpah. It's a bit like Mr & Mrs Smith meets Spy in the suburbs, but
Take True Lies and Mr. & Mrs. Smith. Remove wit, sexy charm, and satire on marriage. This is a recipe for a movie anyone wants to see?
The cast is talented and the concept has potential, but Keeping Up with the Joneses chooses the painfully unamusing, preposterously ludicrous, and tragically annoying route and it's a more devastating and torturous experience because of it.
The laughs are hit-or-miss, occasionally buoyed by Galifianakis' random absurdity or a surprising sight gag but otherwise unremarkable.
The movie is yet another James Bond spoof, no more imaginative than it needs to be. Yet the familiar ingredients are very nicely balanced.
The script sets up the action part of the movie with an interminably laborious and close-fitting literalness that hardly lets any of the actors breathe.
The treatment for this action spoof could have been written on the back of a matchbox - of a single match, even.
There hasn't been a spy couple this perfect since, well, Mr and Mrs Smith. Don Draper and Wonder Woman are well cast as the Joneses, two ultra-sophisticated, impossibly gorgeous, happily-married undercover operatives.
Unoriginal as it is, part of you does envision a use for ...The Joneses as fodder for days when the brain needs 100 minutes or so offline.
Watching Fisher losing her composure is funny, but the material does no favors for Galifianakis.
Woody Allen said of true comedy: If it bends, it's funny. This movie snaps like a twig.
... tries so hard to perpetuate its sitcom-style mayhem that it forgets about basic narrative coherence and comedic timing. The result might make moviegoers just want to pack up and move.
"Keeping Up With The Joneses" isn't outrageously hysterical, but not many comedies are.
A middling movie.
A picture graced with four bright performances but hampered by a plot that felt recycled even back when Millard Fillmore was president.
A turgid, lifeless comedy in which jokes about defecation and even torture are supposed to amuse the viewer.
A wildly inconsequential action-comedy that contains a couple of genuine laughs but which otherwise feels like an extended version of its own television ads.
Calling this movie "half-baked" gives it too much credit -- it is none baked, completely raw and run-through with salmonella.
Despite a fun premise, Keeping Up with the Joneses is a mildly entertaining comedy that's very generic.
Even by mainstream studio comedy standards, Keeping Up with the Joneses is poor. It plays like it was conceived in a Hollywood pitch meeting and has zero connection to human reality.
Fresh, funny action comedy has some violence, racy bits.
Keeping Up With the Joneses is as blandly generic as its title, a comedy that telegraphs every beat with a one-sentence description of the premise and continues the cinematic squandering of Zach Galifianakis since The Hangover.
Scoring laughs with this group should be like shooting fish in a barrel, but instead it's shooting nothing but blanks.
Simply cannot keep up with the comedies it so clearly tries to imitate.
Structured with the kind of obviousness that makes you outwit the screenwriter and then hate movies in general, Greg Mottola's painfully generic suburban spy comedy wastes everybody's time, onscreen and off.
The cast's commitment to the zaniness of Keeping Up With the Joneses makes the story of suburban spycraft more enjoyable than you would initially expect.
The funniest thing about this star-studded comedy are the billboards promoting it.
The result is a fun and manic film that - while definitely earning its PG-13 rating -- fills that rare contemporary void between comedies that are aimed at little kids and those that are stuffed with raunchy R-rated content.
This wannabe satirical action/spy caper goes nowhere at a tedious pace - don't bother...
Tries to keep up with the cinema's best action-comedies, but it ends up failing in that quest. (Full Content Review for Parents - Sexual Content, Violence, Profanity, etc. - also Available)
You can't beat a good action comedy, but Keeping Up With The Joneses fails to bring the laughter and is just about passable on the adrenaline front.
