
Americans are embarrassed. Over the last 35 years there have only been two elections without a Bush or Clinton on the national ticket. Next year both names could rest atop the ballot. In one poll voters saw this as a bad thing by a ratio of 8 to 1.
Some of the people who are upset have a false view of how life works. Since Thomas Hobbes, many people have embraced the illusory notion that society is made up of individuals. According to this view the only fair competition is between individuals, without undue benefit from family connections.
But no society has ever been this way. Individuals don't come fully formed. They emerge out of families and groups. The family and the group are the essential social unit. These collectives have always shaped public life.
According to some surveys, 90 percent of businesses around the world are family-operated businesses. Much research suggests that in the U.S., family-run businesses outperform non-family-run businesses, especially while the founder is still alive.
Politics, too, has always been a dynastic affair. If Hillary Clinton wins the presidency, then 10 of the 45 presidents will have had a family member precede or follow them in the White House. According to my colleagues at The Upshot, among boomers, the son of a senator was 8,500 times more likely to become a senator than the average American male.
Things look the same on the state level. In New York there are Cuomos. In California, Browns. Out West the joke is that voters should just vote for the closest Udall.
If you look around the globe, these pseudo-monarchical tendencies seem to be on the increase, not on the decrease. There are Aquinos in the Philippines, Nehru-Gandhis in India, even Le Pens in France. Now that women are more empowered, each dominant clan has essentially doubled the size of its talent pool, so family influence is increased.
Sunday is Mother's Day, when we celebrate the powerful ways mothers shape their children. Families are unequal. Some mothers — and some fathers, husbands and wives — shape their kin with extraordinary power, and in certain directions. We should fight unfair advantages like legacy admissions, but we wouldn't want to live in a society in which family influence didn't happen.
